I'm just going to say at the top that my name is Marsha Armani and I'm here with Laura Phelps
and we're here to interview Tim Rooney and it is, we're at your home in Marshfields.
That's right.
And it is Tuesday July the 16th 2019.
Okay so I'm just going to pop this down here then Tim.
Tim Rooney that's a good Irish name.
Yeah this is originally Irish.
So I've got some relatives in Northern Ireland.
Yeah.
So I wonder if you could just start off, could you just introduce yourself?
Yeah well I was born in Northern Ireland and born in 1956 and obviously my dad had a farm
here then which was bigger than it is now.
And when I got to school, I wasn't very keen on school, always had horses, always been
involved with horses, started riding point to pointing when I was 14.
And I did like metal work in school so it seemed the obvious thing to do to start an
apprenticeship when I was 16 which I did out at Penhow and did my four year apprenticeship
then and got my certificate, my registered shoeing smith and I've been shoeing horses
ever since.
I've had 15 apprentices, my son being one of them.
My first apprentice was Billy Crothers from Rumney and Cardiff and he became world champion
farrier on five occasions.
My second apprentice was Hayden Price who's been Olympic farrier a couple of occasions.
My third apprentice was Andy Martin who's now got a practice near Chippen Norton in
the Cotswolds.
He's an eminent farrier and judge and trains race horses as well.
So yeah, quite a few apprentices over the years.
I was going to say what's a stable?
What's a stable?
A talent?
That's a bit obvious isn't it?
They all started here, they all did their apprenticeships with me and spent four years
here.
Who did you train under then?
I trained under a chap by the name of Christopher Bell who was a Scotsman who lived at Penhow
and he married, the old forge at Penhow was run by a gentleman by the name of Percy Townsend
and Percy Townsend had four daughters and Lou Bell married one of his daughters and
moved from Invergordon in Scotland down to live in South Wales and I did my apprenticeship
with Lou.
So what sort of, what did you learn from him that you're clearly passing down?
What are you, what have you learned from him?
Work ethic I think as much as anything else and to do quality work which is the most important
thing because horses have to keep, they have to keep horses on the road, keep them sound.
Why did you do your apprenticeship at Penhow?
Tell us what Penhow is.
Penhow is only a small village between Newport and Chepstow on the A48 and there were very
few forges or farriers around when I started in 1972 and there were very few farriers around.
I think between Chepstow and Cowbridge there were four guys shewing horses, now there's
something like 50 shewing horses.
So it's changed a bit, we've trained too many now.
What's changed though in the equine world, why are there more?
Well horses became a lot more popular for riding, for recreational riding, you know
as far as ponies in pony club, riding clubs, general riding and a lot of sort of livery
yards now have got all weather surfaces where people don't have to go riding out on the
roads because the roads are getting so busy now in this area, as in most areas, that it's
more dangerous to ride on the road than it used to be.
Lord Trudiga, he was a huntsman wasn't he?
He was the master of the hunt, he wasn't a huntsman.
What's the difference?
Well the master is the boss and oversees everything, the huntsman is the man that works with the
hounds and actually hunts the hounds.
So they would have used horses?
Yes definitely.
So I'm just trying to think why there are so few farriers.
Well there were a few farriers then.
So you started in 1972 and there were only four then?
In this area, yes.
So when Lord Trudiga was hunting that was much further back?
There was, yes definitely and you see when Lord Trudiga was hunting it would have been
pre-second world war.
The Trudiga estate got split up and it was bought by the Eagle Star Insurance Company
and all the farms were then individually sold off by the Eagle Star Insurance Company, that's
who my dad bought this place off the Eagle Star in 1949 I think it was.
Had been Trudiga estate for?
This was all Trudiga estate owned farms, the lot.
Most of the houses in this area and I think the most easterly farm on the Trudiga estate
is the other side of Penhow in fact on the A48 and they owned, the estate was massive.
You familiar with this area?
Yes.
And Rupera, you've been up to Rupera Castle, well that was Lord Trudiga as well.
The Llanrumney Hall, so all of Llanrumney and Rumney, Lower Macken, Rupera, Macken,
Baselick, Ruderrin, because the original kennels for the estate were in Baselick because they
never had the kennels too close to the main house because of the smell of the hounds and
so as it was then you'd sort of come out of the Trudiga house and hack up to what is
Junction 28 now and then go up Forge Lane and the kennels were just at the top of Forge
Lane on the right hand side.
And when you go to the top of Forge Lane and you've got the Trudiga arms in front of you,
there were workshops to the left of that as well.
My goodness, there must have been so many people who were tenants of the Trudiga estate.
Oh yeah, absolutely, yeah.
So I wonder if we can just go back a little bit and talk about your parents, who were they?
My mum and dad came from St Andrews and Dines Powys.
My mum was from Dines Powys, dad was St Andrews, two villages a mile apart.
My dad was one of five, my mum was one of ten.
They got married and had my older brother just as the Second World War began and then
dad was away in the army, he was in the Royal Artillery and spent about four years in Burma
during the Second World War.
What, he was a prisoner?
No, he was a captain in the Royal Artillery, so he was in Burma.
So he was...
Fighting the Japs.
Goodness, what was his name?
Gustafus Emerson Rooney.
Amazing.
Why, what a name!
Did he use that name, that kind of in common?
He didn't like it, so he got it shortened and everyone called him Govo.
OK.
I wonder what his parents were thinking.
Well, his mother was an Emerson, his father was Rooney, so they were all named...
My uncles were Dennis Emerson Rooney, Bernard Emerson Rooney, William Emerson Rooney and
Gustafus Emerson Rooney.
Gosh!
He totally got the best name.
Wow, Govo.
So he spent four years in Burma with the Royal Artillery.
Did he ever talk about his experiences?
Not a lot.
Not a lot, no.
He came back with a samurai sword that he'd actually taken off a dead Japanese officer.
And when dad died, mum was short of money, so it got sold in Sotheby's because the inside
of the scabbard has the Japanese, the history of that particular family and their family
tree on it, inscribed on it.
So it made then in 1974, that made about £750, which was quite a lot of money.
We used to play with it as kids.
What a story!
Did he say anything else about his experiences?
Just how nasty the Japanese were to fight.
They were not nice people.
Then obviously things have changed over the years, but no, he didn't say a great deal.
And your mother then, tell us about her, what was her name?
Margaret Winifred.
Well that's more like it.
Margaret Winifred Hill was her maiden name.
And as I say, she was one of ten, six girls, four boys, and they were born in St Andrews.
My grandfather, her dad, was Walter Hill who started Hill's Transport in Cardiff, which
became quite a big firm.
But then he died, he died before I was born.
Well both my grandfathers did.
But he died without making a will, so there were family feuds for many years after that.
So do you know how your parents met?
In a village in Dinness Parish.
I can't picture where Dinness Parish is.
Right, Leckwith.
Is it Cardiff?
Just to the west of Cardiff.
Ah, OK.
Wenvo?
Do you know Wenvo?
When you go from Wenvo going towards Roos Airport, when you get to where Wenvo Garden
Centre is, if you turn left at there, then the first place, the village you'll come to
is St Andrews, and the next one is Dinness Parish, and then Leckwith, and you come down
into Cardiff by Cardiff City Stadium.
Oh, OK.
OK.
So what brought your parents here?
And were they from farming stock?
Dad was from farming stock, and then was obviously transport business.
And obviously because these farms were being sold up then by the insurance company, that
was what brought him here.
So Dinness Parish, what's the landscape there?
Is it flat?
No.
Is it hilly?
No, hilly.
OK, so this would have been completely different landscape.
Oh, yeah.
Do you remember him ever talking about maybe the challenges of that?
I think they had a lot of work to do when they first came here, as far as sort of taking
concerned.
Cleaning out reams, that sort of thing.
Because I've been trying to explain to Laura, because neither of us are from the area, so
explain to Laura, you know, the unique drainage system here.
That's right.
So, but if you're, it must be quite a challenge for a farmer coming from a hilly area to come
here.
That's right, because you've got to, I mean, fortunately we're not too bad here.
Once you get just slightly lower down, then it's, the boundaries of the fields are all
reams.
Here, we've still got quite a few hedges.
Why is that then?
Why have you got hedges and not reams?
Because we're just above the structure of the reams.
Oh, really?
OK, I've never thought about that.
So when your parents came here, did it look different?
Well all the farm buildings were that side then.
Oh really?
Yeah.
These were, Dad sold this for development in 1970.
Yeah, around about 1970 I suppose.
So what sort of farm was it?
Milking cows, sheep, pigs, chickens.
Did you have a milk rang then?
No, no.
But in the village here then we had a dairy.
Oh yes, I know.
Where, you've got, just the other side of the shop was Cambroy and United Dairies.
And all the local farmers, there were a structure of very small farms all around here.
And I think, we sat down and worked it out a few years ago, that between Rumney and Newport,
below the A48 there were something like 40 milk producing farms, but now there are three.
They probably milk the same amount of cows, because they're all huge farming units.
Whereas these were all small farms, pretty much self-sufficient, because we'd have 20
odd cows and some sheep, some pigs, some chickens, maybe fatten a couple of turkeys up for Christmas,
that sort of thing.
I wonder if your father ever used the livestock market on, is it Tindy Brown?
Tindy Brown?
He could, I never knew it as Timo Lane, I always knew it as Market Road.
Because the market was, and the market, I can't remember the market being in use, but
he could when he first came here, because they'd be able to drive the stock to market then.
When you say drive, do you mean on the road?
Yeah.
And I mean, there'd be milking cows walking up and down here all the time, going from
the field to the dairy back and forth.
That was the norm in all villages.
When you say to the dairy, you mean...
To be milked.
...milking parlour.
Yeah.
So you had your own milking parlour, did you?
Yeah, there was a cowshed there and that's where they were all milked.
So our milk was in a cooler here, and that's the only milk we ever had.
Went into a churn?
Yeah, yeah, we'd have to take the churns down to the dairy every morning.
So do you know, we've just turned off the main road to come up here, how much has that
road, for example, changed?
Oh, this village in Castleton has changed considerably.
I mean, there was, between here and the Gateway Chapel just down the road, there were no houses.
And then from the Gateway Chapel to the Mason's Arms pub, there were no bungalows.
So it has changed considerably, the village.
It was just a really rural...
Very rural, yeah.
So it was all farmland?
Pretty much so, yeah.
I was just taking Laura down towards Rumney, you know, where the meals are.
Yeah.
You know, I've spoken to people who said that was all farmland in recent...
Yeah, all small holdings, all small farms, small holders.
Yeah.
So your mother pitched in on the farm as well as she helped out?
Yeah, she was a good worker, Mum.
Had to be up at six every morning to get out there and help.
Because Dad, he had what's called farmer's lung, which is from the spores in Faustey
Hay, and that affected his breathing quite considerably.
So he couldn't...
From a young age, I could never remember him being able to do very much physical work.
So Mum had to do quite a lot.
Oh, really?
Mm-hmm.
So I'm the youngest of five.
So as soon as I was old enough, I was helping as well.
You just all had to pitch in?
Yeah, absolutely.
So before we move back onto you, Tim, are there any other memories or anecdotes your
parents told you about running a farm here?
It was hard work, but quite rewarding.
Because the big garden where my son's house is there now, that was our lawn and garden.
For the house here.
And so we'd grow the veg.
There'd be always food here.
There was an orchard just down there.
There was another orchard just up here.
So we always had plenty of apples, pears, that sort of thing.
Cider?
No, no, we didn't make any cider.
Could have done.
The old man was more of a whiskey drinker than a cider drinker.
So you didn't have a mobile cider press around you?
No.
OK.
Did the...
What about haymaking time and stuff?
Yeah.
Was that something... did your parents have to do the old-fashioned rick and...
They did before they moved here.
By the time they'd moved here, which is, as I say, after the Second World War, small bales
of hay were being produced then.
Did your father then, when your parents came here, did they have workhorses?
No.
He had an old tractor.
Oh.
That was quite early for a tractor then.
Well, they started before the Second World War, the tractors.
They started in the sort of 20s and 30s, but they didn't come into a lot of use until the
early 50s.
Yeah.
So he was quite early then, really, wasn't he?
So what's your earliest memory here?
This has been your home forever?
Yeah, it has.
Yeah.
When my wife and I got married, we moved to a little house in Baislech and then moved
back to Mallards Reach and then ended up buying this back off my mum, because she was getting
elderly, living on her own, because Dad died when I was 18, so...
So she found it tough, and so I bought it back off her.
So it was still a small holding then?
Yes.
Yeah, Mum would rent the ground out just to get a bit of small income.
But I've always had the forge there, so obviously I would pay Mum rent for the forge until we
bought it.
So did you go to Marshfield School?
Yeah.
So what was that like?
So you were there...
Well, it was an old church school, Marshfield School.
Where Marshfield School is now, the building just the other side of the traffic calming,
was the church school, that was the school.
Oh really?
Yeah.
Ah.
Erm, let me see...
So you would have been there in the 60s?
That would have been...
I started in Marshfield School in 1961, and I moved then up to Beysleyck when I was 11,
so 1967.
So what was school like then?
Marshfield School was quite a nice little school.
Erm, you start off in what was the Infants, and then moved up three classes before moving
on to Beysleyck.
So what did you do as a child down here?
Played quite a lot.
What sort of things did you do?
Climbing trees, making dens.
Did you ever play in the rings?
Erm, no, not really.
No, between here and the county club in St Melons, which is only three quarters of a
mile as the crow flies directly across there, erm, and Dad rented a lot of ground there
off the guy who bought the golf course back in the 1940s.
That would have been off the... presumably that was off the Trinidad estate as well.
Erm, a chap by the name of Gwyn Davies, and he and Dad were quite friendly, so Dad used
to rent the ground off him, and we had the grazing on the golf course during the winter
as well.
Oh really?
Because golf wasn't the sport or pastime that it is now, and during the winter no one would
play golf.
Do you like graze grazing?
So we grazed sheep up there.
Oh my goodness, can you imagine?
And then we'd use what were the roughs then.
I mean the roughs are about this high now.
Do you play golf at all?
No.
Erm, but all golf courses now, the grass, there's no long grass anywhere, whereas when
we had the ground up there, erm, we'd make hay off the roughs in the summer time, and
graze sheep in the winter time.
Oh that's hilarious.
Of course, when we were making hay then, cutting the grass, you'd be finding lots of golf balls,
so we'd go and sell them as kids, we'd go and sell them back to the golfers.
What did the golfers ever have anything to say about that?
Were they ever up there at all?
Yeah, but they didn't know anything different, that wasn't the norm then.
What about the seawall?
Did you ever go down there?
Yeah, we used to go down there as kids playing.
Which part of the seawall did you go down?
By the lighthouse.
Okay, and what sort of things did you get up to down there?
Catching, erm, crabs.
Hmm.
What, going down on the foreshore then?
Yeah.
So was that ever, were your parents ever concerned about you being down there?
They generally took us down there.
Oh!
Ha ha ha ha ha!
I mean, because you have to know the tides though, don't you?
Because it has to be...
Oh yeah, the tides can be very dangerous, so we'd never go too far from the seawall.
Hmm.
Did you ever go out and find anything?
Find anything, as in?
Clay pipes, cannon balls?
No.
No?
Did you ever swim in the water there?
No.
Did you?
It's muddy.
Ha ha ha!
Well, people have done, haven't they?
My dad would take us down to cold nap baths to swim.
Oh really?
Ha ha ha ha!
Well, I learnt to swim in the swimming pool in the county club.
Oh really?
It was a private house then, and it had an indoor pool, which were very rare things in
those days.
Yeah, quite posh.
Hmm, very posh.
You've got your own now though, haven't you?
A hot tub, yeah.
So we had just been down at the lighthouse in the big chalet park there.
What was there before that was established?
Well, I can't remember it anything other than a caravan park, because there were kids that
came to Marshfield School from the caravan site there.
Oh.
But it wasn't a gypsy travelling?
No, never.
No.
So, do you know there's lots of gypsy travelling camps around?
Have they always been down here?
No.
No?
They were situated between Peterstone, as in by the six bells, and Rumney.
The verges there are very, very wide.
Now this horse is tethered out there.
But there would be a couple of Romany gypsies with their caravans parked on some of those
wide verges, and that's where they lived.
But the gypsy camps now, they're Irish tinkers, they're not real old gypsies.
These were the proper old Romany gypsies.
Yeah, what, with roll-top caravans?
Yeah, roll-top caravans, slightly darker skins, and the ladies would come round selling pegs
or telling fortunes.
Oh, yeah.
So, would never turn them away.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
So, let's just go back to when you started to become, when did you first think about
becoming a farrier?
When I was in school and Dad, I wanted to leave school and he said, well, you've got
to go to work.
And that was really the only thing that appealed to me.
So, I started my apprenticeship with the idea of doing my apprenticeship and then doing
something else afterwards.
But as I say, Dad died halfway through my apprenticeship.
So there was always stuff to do here.
And then I met my wife when I was 18 or 19.
We got married when I was 21.
And the rest, as they say, is history.
But so, why did you choose Penhow to do your apprenticeship?
We used to take horses out there to be shod.
Roaring horses?
Yeah.
OK, so how long have you kept horses?
Oh, my gosh.
My grandfather, Dad's father, was a horse dealer and used to sell horses to the army.
And he used to race horses.
My father raced.
All of my uncles raced.
Oh, my goodness.
So, let's just go to your father's father.
What was his name?
He was Gustavus as well.
My goodness.
So, he was a horse dealer?
Yeah.
And farmer.
OK, well, tell me about him then.
Well, he was dead before I was born.
So it's only hearsay from what I heard from my father.
I mean, he had four sons and a daughter.
So I think he was quite strict.
And he was still riding into his 70s.
When you say riding, what, leisure riding or racing?
No, no, no, riding horses to get them schooled or sell.
And he used to sell horses to the army because the army wanted as many horses as they could
get, especially leading up to the Second World War.
That's amazing.
And then his sons, because my dad was the youngest of the four sons, and the other sons
all went into horses in one way or another.
And what sort of way?
Uncle Dennis went to work for a chap in the West Country who had hunters and he produced
the hunters for him.
Uncle Barney was head lad in a racing yard out of Chepstow for Colin Davis.
And that was a very successful yard.
And then Uncle Bill, he went to Northern Ireland and he became the biggest winner of point
to point races for many, many years until the record was broken about 12 years ago.
And he also had stallions that stood there.
He had a son and four daughters.
His son got killed racing.
Broke his neck, got killed.
My cousin Jerry, Uncle Bill got killed actually and they said the last rites over him because
they thought he was Catholic.
But he survived, just a full son.
My Uncle Barney, he broke his neck at Worcester races but he survived.
My brother broke his neck and he survived.
Wow, they're jockeys.
Yeah.
But when you say jockey, do you mean you said point to point?
Yeah, point to point amateur racing.
OK, so they're jockeys.
Amateur jockeys.
OK.
OK, so what's the difference then?
Amateurs don't get paid.
But, I mean, are you tougher?
Well, normally you've got a day job as well.
Yeah, but is the course...
The courses were a lot tougher than they are now.
And when I started point to point, and I said I was 14, and in point to points and it under
rules then, there were no, what I call, safety factors.
Now, the number of horses that run in each race, there's a limit as to how many can run.
There were no safety factors in those days.
Every race was a cavalry charge.
Would you have worn a helmet?
Yes, but not as good as they were now.
You know, health and safety has improved that considerably in so much as the helmets and
the body protectors.
We had no body protectors.
Just a flimsier sort of helmet.
And so your dad was a horseman too?
Yeah, yeah.
Dad rode about 70 winners point to point in.
Really?
Yeah.
Where did he race then?
With any races down here?
Oh yeah, local point to points.
Where?
Beyslech, Macken, Penhow, Howick near Chapstow, Bonvillsten, Penturk.
Yeah, there were a lot of local point to points.
So was he still racing later in life?
He would have finished racing in the sort of late 60s and then I started in 1970.
So he would have probably finished in 1964, 65 maybe.
So you kept horses here?
Always, yeah.
How many did you have?
I suppose the most we've ever had.
He would probably have been about a dozen.
So that's how you knew the farrier in Penhow?
Yeah.
Dad brought yours up there.
But that's quite away from here, isn't it?
Yeah, it is.
Why did he not choose somewhere closer?
There wasn't, well there was one in Macken but he wasn't, there was one very old gentleman
in Macken who didn't want to take on any more work.
But his son hadn't done any proper training so dad didn't want to take the horses to him.
He wanted to take them to a guy that was well trained.
So this was a Scottish guy?
Yeah.
So he'd been there for a long time?
No, he was quite a young guy.
Lou was only sort of 30, 31 when I started my apprenticeship.
And then by the time I was getting to the end of my apprenticeship in 1976, Lou had
to give up because he got bad sciatica, back trouble.
So I was able to take on some of his work and then the business progressed from there.
So when you finished your apprenticeship did you set up here?
Yeah.
So what were the early days like then here?
I mean was there much, did you and do you get much custom from the area?
Oh yeah, because there weren't very many farriers about then so I was pretty much inundated
with work.
That's why I took on apprentices to help me.
And the business progressed from there.
Can you probably just go back to Penhow slightly?
Yeah.
So is that Penhow Beagles?
Yeah, well that was very close to where the forge was in Penhow.
You know where the Forester's Oaks pub is?
Yeah.
When you pass the Forester's Oaks you climb a hill and halfway up that hill there's an
entrance in on the right hand side to Hunter's Lodge and Derek Jones had the Beagles there.
That's where he kept the Monmouth Beagles and then the forge at Penhow was just past
the Crosswind pub.
As you pass the Crosswind pub there's a little house on the right hand side.
That was the house for the forge and the buildings were just a little further down.
So you would have had lots of hunts?
A lot of horses came to the forge then.
Yeah.
We didn't go out shooing.
No, they came to you.
Yeah.
Well how much is your job going out then?
No.
I mean...
We go out to shoo virtually every horse we shoo now because people, number one, they
would prefer you to go to them because it's more convenient.
It suits us a lot better because the horses are quieter in their own environment than
putting them in a trailer or a lorry and taking them to a forge because they're out of their
comfort zone a little bit then.
Whereas when I was at Penhow most of the horses that came to the forge to be shot were ridden
there.
Ridden there?
Well yeah, it was a different... the traffic wasn't like it is now.
So do you know, I've seen people trotting along here with those little carriage... not
carriage, not sure...
Sulky.
It's a silky.
A silky?
Yeah.
S-I-L?
S-U-L-K-I-E.
Sulky.
Sulky, okay.
Yeah, that's what they're called and that's what they train them behind that and then
race them on tracks.
Oh right, okay.
So is that necessarily a gypsy traveller type thing?
Yeah, it is a little bit but they do a certain... they do some road races as well which aren't
legal I don't think.
Well I think I've seen them on the A48.
They go on the A48, they go on the risk of bypass.
Yeah, it's quite scary.
Yeah.
So do you get custom from these... you know the horses at Tether?
I have shot some of them for them in the past.
I don't shoot any for them now.
Okay.
Some my son does a few.
But would that have been quite a bit of custom at some point?
Yeah, because they wear the shoes out very quickly.
Yeah, yeah.
So where do most of your customers come from then?
Well word of mouth, I mean I've been shooing for most of my customers for 30 odd years
I suppose.
Some a bit longer.
So we must be doing something right to keep the custom and generally word of mouth.
But most of the horses we shoo are sort of riding horses now.
We did at one time shoo a couple of racing yards and there were a lot more point to pointers
trained locally back in the sort of 70s, 80s and 90s.
There aren't now.
So we used to have a lot of work from the point to pointers and race horses.
Why aren't there now?
A lot of farmers don't have point to pointers now.
Whereas it used to be that every farmer would have a point to pointer.
And there are fewer farmers here as well?
Yeah, yeah definitely.
So when I think of horses and horse racing I always think of posh people.
No.
So but...
Anyone can have a horse to go point to pointer.
Was it something that most farm sons did then?
Yeah, a great deal of farmers had a point to pointer and their sons or daughters would
get involved with them.
So sons and daughters could race alongside each other?
Yeah, but now the restrictions for riding in point to pointers become more difficult.
You've got to pay to get a riding certificate.
You can't start until you're 16.
Whereas there was no age restriction years ago.
And it's become...
It has become more professional unfortunately.
So that it's sort of pushing the real amateur's fun lovers away from the sport a little.
Which is a shame.
What's the biggest horse you've ever shooed?
Shooed.
Or shod.
What's the expression?
Biggest.
18 hands.
Is that big?
Yeah.
Smallest?
26 inches.
Have you ever been kicked or bitten or anything like that?
Yeah, loads of times.
Kick, bitten, broken bones, stitches.
All the fingers have been stitched together at one point or another.
So you were in your workshop before and it almost looks timeless.
Really.
And I don't mean that to be an insult.
I think it looks gorgeous.
Is there anything about the craft of being a farrier?
I mean, would you describe yourself as a farrier?
Yeah, definitely.
The tools that you can buy are a lot better now.
Precision tools are a lot better.
And obviously electric helped a great deal.
Yeah.
Because you have originally the old wind up forges.
That was the first sort of forge to take out.
And then gas forges became usable.
So then it was far easier to go out shooing horses.
Maybe more mobile.
Definitely.
But is there anything about your craft that is uniquely Welsh or of the levels?
I mean, could you say that?
No.
No?
In a word.
Tipsy.
Hello, hello darling.
So do you know, I'll come back to the thought for a minute with me,
but do your fields have names?
Yes.
The one across there that's got the bales in it is the Chapel Field,
because that's the closest one to the chapel.
This is the front field.
Field down there has always been known as the Field Beyond Goods,
because the cottage there was Bill Good and his wife,
and then Ron Good, their son.
And they were there for as long as ever I can remember.
So, yeah.
Do you know there on any map?
Or is that just something you know?
Oh, that's just our way of calling them.
So would you know the names of reams around here?
No, only the sort of main ream there, going down to the gout farm.
So the gout, forgive me for saying the ignorance,
the gout is, is that another name for ream?
No, there was a farm at the bottom of the Broadway.
That long...
The long wide ream, the very wide ream,
when you go past the Imiron now and over the railway bridge,
then you've got the Broadway there, is a big main ream,
and when you get to the bottom of that,
the building on the right hand side now was the gout farm.
Is it still there?
The building is, the farm isn't, no, no.
The farm got sold, just across the way,
there was turned into a golf course,
but that's not, it's not a golf course anymore.
Quite a few golf courses around here, aren't there?
Yeah, yeah.
Did you ever have fish in the reams?
Yeah, we used to catch fish.
What sort of fish?
Oh, only little tiddlers, nothing very much, nothing substantial.
No eels or anything?
You'd see an odd eel, yeah, but not too many.
So, do you know when you were a child, a young boy, and now,
has anything changed in nature, has anything disappeared,
or anything returned, or anything like that?
Disappeared.
Any birds you used to see, or flowers you used to...
We hear the cuckoo now.
We hear the cuckoo every year.
Haven't heard a cuckoo down here for 20 years, I don't suppose.
So the cuckoo's gone.
Night jar, we don't hear a night jar now.
Get plenty of swallows, but they were late this year.
Probably not as many starlings as they used to be.
But apart from that, that would probably be all, as far as the birds are concerned.
Hairs?
Don't see any hairs now, used to see lots of hairs.
Otters?
Haven't seen an otter for a long time now, because they were mink that got loose,
and they basically chased the otters away, because they were more aggressive.
So did you have any unusual clients over the years?
You don't have to name them.
Any unusual clients?
Yeah, or ones that stand out in your memory?
Quite a few.
There used to be a very grand old gentleman by the name of Len Hayes,
who lived just off Wentlug Road in Rumney,
and he used to drive horses all the time.
Len was quite a character, always wore a grey bowler hat,
had one foot which was a bit gammy, so he never walked sound.
But he used to drive horses quite a lot.
Through choice, because he didn't have a car?
Oh, through choice.
He'd drive the horses from Rumney to the Forge to get shod, and then drive them home again.
So was it just a little two-seater?
Oh, no, he'd drive a carriage, so he'd be able to take four or five people in it.
Oh, why?
Oh, yeah, proper. He'd two big grey horses.
Oh, how lovely.
He was a great old character, Len Hayes.
What was his background then?
He'd always been a coach in person, because he...
I don't know when it was, but he drove a stagecoach from St Melan's to London,
but I don't know how long ago.
Why? Just because he could?
Yeah. They had stop-off points on the way, because there were no motorways then.
Gosh, that's amazing.
Yeah.
Well, did he tell you that?
Yeah, he told me that.
Yeah? So he had a collection of carriages?
He did, yeah.
Yeah, he used to have a little hackney pony that he'd take in a small carriage,
a bit bigger than the silkies you see out here.
But then, as far as the bigger horses are concerned,
he had a couple of different carriages for them,
because he did weddings and that sort of thing.
Gosh. And he lived near Rumley, that way?
Yeah, he was off Wendtlug Road.
Yeah. Any other characters?
Erm, well, the original old Tom Price the Gypsy,
he came here one morning about half past six, I suppose, in a Morris 1000 van.
That would have been 1976, I suppose,
with a Shetland pony in the back, to be sure.
In the back of the van?
In the back of the van, back of a Morris 1000 van.
Yeah.
So was he quite a well-known character in the community?
Yeah, he was.
Why?
I think he was a bit of a fighter.
Oh!
He had about four sons and they're all erm...
They've all had horses over the years.
Not nice.
He was a genuine chap.
Did he live in a roll-top or something?
No, he lived in a caravan.
Hmm.
Do you have erm... So your son, no, he was your apprentice?
Yep, he was.
And he's working with you? Yeah, what's his name?
Sam.
So, second generation. Yep.
So you're passing on skills that you learnt from your teacher?
That's right.
Yeah.
And what I've learnt from my apprentices over the years as well.
Okay.
As you always learn stuff.
If they go off to competitions or shows and they come back with other ideas,
so you have to be open-minded.
Something that you'd like to ask.
I'm quite intrigued by these, like the sort of world championships
and the Olympic events.
Oh, right, yeah, well Billy Crothers, as I say, was from Maxwell Road in Romney
and he was always very keen on doing competitions
and he went off to America
and they had a competition,
they went to America
and they had world championships at the Calgary Stampede,
which is in July, beyond now I suppose, maybe it was last week,
and he won the world championships over there five times.
That's amazing.
Another Welshman who did his apprenticeship in Cowbridge was Grant Moon
and he did his apprenticeship at the same time as Billy
and he won the world championship five times as well.
So how does it work?
How do they compete? How are they assessed?
Well, we went across, my wife and I went across to the Stampede about,
must be about 11 years ago I suppose,
and Billy and Andy were competing across there at the same time.
And what they do is they have to shoe a foot on a horse
by starting off with a piece of straight bar,
measure the horse's foot, cut the bar to the right size
and then trim the horse's foot in readiness for it,
make the shoe, fit it and apply it within a certain time.
And they have to do that over a period of a couple of days on different horses,
different types of horses, and always within a time limit.
That's remarkable, things that you never even think about existing.
I know, I know.
It was like $10,000 to the winner.
So what makes one, I don't know how to phrase the question,
how would one person's work be judged as superior to another?
What are the criteria?
The quality of the work, the precision of the work,
the levelness of the foot, the symmetry of the foot when it's been trimmed
has to be very, very good, the levelness has to be good.
Then when the shoe is made, it has to fit that foot exactly,
and within a certain time.
Tipsy.
She's bigger than you, Tips.
How old is she?
Oh, she's only about 13 weeks now.
We went up to Mould in North Wales to get her when she was just coming up to 8 weeks old.
She's been very brave.
Whether she'd be that brave if there wasn't a fence there, I don't know.
Sorry, I know I asked you this before, but I wasn't recording it.
What are the oldest tools in your workshop, and have any been passed on to you?
Well, there are some tongs in there, which I had off a couple of guys when I started out.
There would be a couple of shoeing tools that I had off an old gentleman
the other side of the village, Tom Meakin.
Who was he?
He lived on the Market Road, or Timoallayne, and he had a pigery there.
And when I started, he had done a little bit of shoeing at some point or another for himself many years before.
So he handed me a couple of tools.
Because he kept work horses, presumably?
Yeah.
And then, as I say, some tongs for making shoes to hold them.
I had those just after I started.
Then there was another guy who had been working up in the valleys, and he retired and had given up.
He was living across here in Dufferin, and he rang me up and said,
I've got some tools here if you want to come and buy them.
So I bought those tools off him.
And the anvils, a couple of anvils there that are quite old, which I bought.
I bought the one, I was given the other one.
So they'd be pretty old, I suppose.
So you've talked a lot about being a farrier, but did you ever have much trade from farmers
wanting to use your forging skills?
Well, when I was doing my apprenticeship in Penhow,
what we used to have was that the council workers would come in then
and bring in, say, 20 picks to be sharpened.
You don't see council workers using picks now.
Because it's all machined.
But they had picks that would get worn out or broken,
so they'd bring them into the forge to be sharpened.
We did some work for Welsh Water Authority, making brackets and that sort of thing.
And we've done the same here.
When I first came here, I first started after finishing my apprenticeship,
putting handles in shovels and spades, forks, that sort of thing, or repairing them,
and sharpening tools.
Repairing shovels and forks?
Putting new handles in them.
And if they were bent or anything, then we'd straighten them up and put them...
How much of that do you get now?
Not very much. People go and buy new instead.
It's that we're in a throwaway society.
They don't repair things, they just chuck it away and buy something new.
They can bring it to a farrier or a forge and they can source it for you.
Yeah.
Do you ever think that at high tide you're below sea level here?
No. I think we're 22 foot above sea level here.
You're 22 foot above? Okay.
So this is where the land is beginning to rise again a bit here?
Yeah.
Have you ever been on the sea wall when it's at high tide?
What's that like?
Oh, it's pretty impressive.
Especially when you get the spring and autumn tides, which are quite high.
Yeah.
And of course, they said about the great flood in the 15th century,
because there's a mark on Marshfield Church,
and there's a mark on Gethly Bear, where the tidal waters came up to.
But it was probably a tsunami, wasn't it?
We can't make the mine out, can we?
But yeah, the whole of the moors were flooded.
And at very low tide, you can see the remains of the old Peterston village out in the mudflats.
No, I've been told that. Is that true?
Yeah.
Really? Have you seen it?
But yeah, you see remains of buildings.
So what happened? Why is that out there? Is that because the sea's retreated or come back?
Well, that's where the village of Peterston was.
Where you stand on the sea wall, that's where the sea wall was built.
Wow. My goodness.
I couldn't tell you exactly when the sea wall was built,
but it was the sea wall defence to stop any more flooding.
My goodness, that's amazing.
So the villagers had to retreat back to what is higher ground.
I wonder when that was.
Is it before your lifetime? Before you were born?
Oh yeah, yeah. I can't remember when it was.
Did you, um, did you have anything else you wanted to ask?
Is there anything else you'd like to add, Tim, that we haven't asked?
Oh, nice. You've been fairly thorough.
Oh, that makes a change.
Does it feel good that your son's carrying on?
Oh yeah, definitely.
So, sorry, have I asked this question about when you started off or when your father moved down here?
Would there have been any village ford? You haven't talked about it?
There wasn't a ford in Marshfield. There was a ford in Castleton.
Yeah.
And I believe the lady whose husband had the ford is still there.
She's very elderly, but when you get to the top of Castleton
and you've got the old church on the right-hand side,
just next to it there was an old tiny ford there.
Oh really? So was that within your father's lifetime?
Yes.
Yeah.
But Dad originally used to ride horses to St. Melons to get them shot.
Did he?
Yeah, before transporting horses.
I can only remember going to Penhow to get the horses shot.
Jack Jones had a forge in St. Melons.
They're building some buildings there now.
There's a chip shop and it was just past that.
And the forge house is still there.
And he used to spend three days of the week there.
And he had another forge up in Rumney.
There was a pub which has been knocked down now called the Carpenter's Arms.
And his other forge was on the end of the Carpenter's Arms.
What, to maximise his business you mean?
Yeah, yeah.
Because obviously all the customers then would ride horses or lead horses to the forge.
So it was easier to lead them if they were closer to St. Melons or closer to Rumney.
So how would your father have got to St. Melons from here?
Oh from here to two miles.
Oh really?
Yeah, down the road here.
And you come out by, well you go to Cypress Drive but you didn't have to then.
It was just through the lanes.
But do you know, just the footpaths around here.
Yeah.
Do you know about all the footpaths?
Oh don't I?
They're a bane of our life.
The footpath comes right through the middle of this yard.
There's a stoyle there.
And it goes right through the front field.
There's a stoyle at the bottom of the front field.
Yeah.
Well it's just a shortcut for kids now back and forth to the playing fields.
But originally footpaths were built to either go to church or go to a well.
So, sorry, are they still a public right of way?
Yeah.
Even though they're going through your land.
So you don't have to just let anyone who wants to run through here.
Yeah, but we do police them.
Right.
You know, because we've got kids coming through, messing about and playing and jumping on fences and kicking a ball around.
There's all the animals as well.
Smoking and drinking and so yeah, we keep a very close eye on them.
So was there a well up away somewhere?
There was a well.
Where those big trees are there, there was a well in there.
I can remember as a kid.
Really?
Hmm.
What do you remember about it?
Was it a functioning well?
There was water running there.
Really?
Yeah, there was a big old slab of covering it basically.
So did your parents use that when they arrived here?
Nope.
No, no, they had water coming in on a tap.
That's interesting, isn't it?
Modern.
Oh yeah, that is modern for its time, isn't it?
Yeah.
I was just talking to somebody this morning about the Bryn Ivar care home.
Bryn Ivar care, yep.
He was brought up in Castleton.
Oh yeah.
And he said their only water was from a spring.
Was it?
Yeah.
For the first ten years of his life.
Good Lord.
He's a bit 90, you know.
Is there anything else you'd like to ask him that we haven't asked?
I don't think so.
Shall I switch it off then?
Yeah, kind of fine.
No problem.
I hope I haven't missed anything.
But you've got an opportunity to add stuff and take stuff away.
Sure, that's okay.
Is that okay?
Yeah.
Thank you.
No trouble.
That's just bang on an hour.
Oh, that's fine.
Yeah, yeah.